tava vilokanādgopikājanā: pramadasaṅkulā: paṅkajekṣaṇa |
amṛtadhārayā saṃplutā iva stimitatāṃ dadhustvatpurogatā: ||1||
tava vilokanāt-	( with) Thy vision (by seeing)
gopikā-janā:	the Gopikaas
pramada-saṅkulā:	with joy overcome
paṅkajekṣaṇa	O Lotus eyed One!
amṛta-dhārayā	by the immortal bliss downpour
saṃplutā iva	drenched as if
stimitatāṃ	motionless
dadhu:-	attained
tvat-puro-gatā:	by Thy in front coming
O Lotus eyed One! As the Gopikaas saw Thee and approached Thee, they were overcome with joy. They stood stupefied and motionless as if drenched in a downpour of Immortal Bliss, seeing Thee in front of them.
tadanu kācana tvatkarāmbujaṃ sapadi gṛhṇatī nirviśaṅkitam |
ghanapayodhare sannidhāya sā pulakasaṃvṛtā tasthuṣī ciram ||2||
tadanu kācana	after that, one woman
tvat-karāmbujam	Thy lotus hand
sapadi gṛhṇatī	suddenly holding
nirviśaṅkitam	without hesitation
ghana-payodhare	on (her) heavy breasts
sannidhāya sā	placing she
pulaka-saṃvṛtā	with horripilation all around
tasthuṣī ciram	stood for long
After that, one woman, suddenly took hold of Thy lotus hand and without hesitation placed it on her heavy breasts. She stood like that for a long time with all her hair standing on end.
tava vibho'parā komalaṃ bhujaṃ nijagalāntare paryaveṣṭayat |
galasamudgataṃ prāṇamārutaṃ pratinirundhatīvātiharṣulā ||3||
tava vibho-	Thy O Lord!
aparā	another woman
komalaṃ bhujaṃ	Thy tender arms
nija-gala-antare	her own neck around
paryaveṣṭayat	wound
gala-samudgataṃ	coming out of the throat
prāṇa-mārutaṃ	the vital breath
pratinirundhati-	stopping
iva-ati-harṣulā	as if, extremely overjoyed
Another woman extremely overjoyed, O Lord! Wound Thy tender arms around her own neck, as if stopping the vital breath coming out of her throat.
apagatatrapā kāpi kāminī tava mukhāmbujāt pūgacarvitam |
pratigṛhayya tadvaktrapaṅkaje nidadhatī gatā pūrṇakāmatām ||4||
apagata-trapā	devoid of shame
kāpi kāminī	some one woman
tava	Thy
mukha-ambujāt	from the lotus like mouth
pūga-carvitam	betel chewed
pratigṛhayya	taking
tat-vaktra-paṅkaje	(in) her lotus like mouth
nidadhatī gatā	putting, attained
pūrṇa-kāmatām	fulfillment of all desires
One woman, devoid of all shame, from Thy lotus like mouth, taking the chewed betel, put it into her lotus like mouth. Doing so she attained the summit of fulfillment of all desires.
vikaruṇo vane saṃvihāya māmapagato'si kā tvāmiha spṛśet |
iti saroṣayā tāvadekayā sajalalocanaṃ vīkṣito bhavān ||5||
vikaruṇa:	without any pity
vane saṃvihāya mām-	in the forest leaving me
apagata:-asi	having gone away
kā tvām-iha	which one (of us), Thee here
spṛśet iti	will touch, thus (saying)
saroṣayā tāvat-	resentfully then
ekayā	by one (woman)
sajala-locanam	with tearful eyes
vīkṣita: bhavān	were seen Thou
Who ever of us, here, will ever touch Thee who mercilessly abandoned me in the forest.' One of them resentfully said as she looked at Thee with tearful eyes.
iti mudā''kulairvallavījanai: samamupāgato yāmune taṭe |
mṛdukucāmbarai: kalpitāsane ghusṛṇabhāsure paryaśobhathā: ||6||
iti mudākulai:-	thus with them who were overwhelmed with joy
vallavījanai:	the Gopikaas
samam-upāgata:	with them went to
yāmune taṭe	the Yamunaa banks
mṛdu-kuca-ambarai:	with the soft upper garments (scarfs)
kalpita-āsane	prepared seat (on that)
ghusṛṇa-bhāsure	(which was) with saffron tainted
paryaśobhathā:	Thou shone
In this manner, Thou went to the banks of the river Yamunaa with the Gopikaas who were overwhelmed with joy. The Gopikaas prepared a seat with their saffron tainted upper clothes, on which Thou sat with all splendour and shining with glory.
katividhā kṛpā ke'pi sarvato dhṛtadayodayā: kecidāśrite |
katicidīdṛśā mādṛśeṣvapītyabhihito bhavān vallavījanai: ||7||
katividhā kṛpā	of how many varieties is kindness
ke-api sarvata:	some (people have) for all
dhṛta-dayodayā:	having compassion
kecit-āśrite	some people for (their) dependents
katicit-īdṛśā	some (people) are such (like Thee who)
mā-dṛśeṣu-api-	on people like me even (do not have pity)
iti-abhihita:	thus were told
bhavān	Thou
vallavījanai:	by the Gopikaas
The Gopikaas told Thee 'There are so many varieties of compassion. Some people have compassion for everyone. Some have compassion for their dependents. Yet, some are such that they do not have compassion even towards those who have given up everything and fully surrendered, like me.'
ayi kumārikā naiva śaṅkyatāṃ kaṭhinatā mayi premakātare |
mayi tu cetaso vo'nuvṛttaye kṛtamidaṃ mayetyūcivān bhavān ||8||
ayi kumārikā	O dear girls!
na-eva śaṅkyatāṃ	do not certainly doubt
kaṭhinatā mayi	hard heartedness in me
prema-kātare	(who is) afraid of losing your love
mayi tu	in me indeed
cetasa: va:-	your minds
anuvṛttaye	may continuously be fixed
kṛtam-idam	this was done
mayā-iti-	by me thus
ucivān	said
bhavān	Thou
Thou told them, 'O dear girls! Do not at all suspect me to be hard hearted. I am afraid of losing your love. I did this (the disappearing) so that your minds may be continuously fixed in me.'
ayi niśamyatāṃ jīvavallabhā: priyatamo jano nedṛśo mama |
tadiha ramyatāṃ ramyayāminīṣvanuparodhamityālapo vibho ||9||
ayi niśamyatāṃ	Oh please listen
jīvavallabhā:	most dear ones
priyatama: jana:	more dear person
na-īdṛśa: mama	is not than this (you) mine (for me)
tat-iha ramyatāṃ	therefore here sport
ramya-yāminīṣu-	in the beautiful nights
anuparodham-	without hindrance
iti-ālapa:	thus said Thou
vibho	O Lord!
O most dear Ones! Please listen to me. Take it from me that there is none as dear to me as you. Therefore here on the banks of Yamunaa in the beautiful nights sport with me without any hindrance.' Thus, O Lord! Thou told them.
iti girādhikaṃ modamedurairvrajavadhūjanai: sākamāraman |
kalitakautuko rāsakhelane gurupurīpate pāhi māṃ gadāt ||10||
iti girā-	thus by such declaration
adhikaṃ	even more
moda-medurai:-	filled with intense joy
vraja-vadhūjanai:	the Gopikaas of Vraja
sākam-āraman	with them sporting
kalita-kautuka:	full of enthusiasm
rāsa-khelane	engaged in Raasa-leelaa
gurupurīpate	O Lord of Guruvaayur!
pāhi māṃ gadāt	save me from ailments
Thus with such declaration the Gopikaas were even more full of intense joy. Thou then, sporting with them, full of enthusiasm engaged in Raasaleelaa. O Lord of Guruvaayur! Save me from ailments.